# Levi-Script Devlog #1

Like many others, I'm working on a programming language. It's going to be a
scripting language intended for replacing bash. Only for scripting, not the
interactive part. It's going to be functional and statically typed. A key part
is that it allows function overloading, and is fully type inferenced.

It combines everything I like in other languages at put's it into a scope I
might be able to finish. A real compiler is hard, a real stdlib is hard, and
the scope would be terrifying, however, something where most parts of a
standard library are done by external programs might be doable.
Also, I'll never write a systems language and get to use it on any project, but
nearly every project, independent of its language, contains bash scripts.
Those scripts could be Levi-scripts at some point.

The focus is on scripts that become unhandy in bash, say 100+ lines. Most
scripts should be smaller than 1k lines, but it should also be possible to
build bigger stuff in it. Static typing and immutability should help with that.

The second focus is on conciseness. I'm always annoyed when I feel like code is
unnecessarily verbose. Levi-Script should allow you to formulate what you want
to say with as little code as possible. 

It started out in Ocaml, because I have a faible for functional languages, and
wanted to use one. However, using a completely unknown language would slow me
down too much, so I switched to Rust, which also has a very nice ecosystem of
libraries.

I use pest for the parsing, which so far worked out really nicely. It also has
the advantage of combining lexer and parser. The parsing tree that pest
generates is then transformed into an AST manually, and that AST is compiled
into bytecode. During compilation, the bytecode is a vector of enums, but at
the end it is translated into a `Vec<u8>`. There is a code and a data segment.
Only the code segment is translated into a byte vector, the data-segment is a
`Vec<Value>`, which will be serialized and deserialized separately. 

One thing that gave me big trouble, that I (hopefully) got right now, was data
representation. There is one data type that holds all data that might exist in
Levi-Script: primitives, containers of primitives, and later, custom data
types. The catch is: there are also references, which you shouldn't have to
deal with as LS user, but on the interpreter they are very real. Also strings
are basically primitives on the Leviscript side, but you can't treat them
like, let's say, an int. The is no pain in copying int's around, but with
strings you definitely want references and copy those around instead of the
string. But if Strings themselves don't live on the stack, where do they live?
And how do you handle references?

Originally, I had intended to combine stack and heap, and have a reference be
an index into the stack, at which a string would lie. If a string goes onto the
stack, in reality a string, and a reference to it would go onto the stack, and
the ref would get coppied around. That produces multiple problems though. If
you have a Data type like this:

```rust
enum Data {
    CopyData,
    NonCopyData
    Ref(usize)
}
```

you need an instance of your stack and the object that holds your value to get
a value, because your value object might actually be a reference. This becomes
quite impractical in many places. That's why I switched to Refernces being
pointers. They require unsafe code, but Rust-refs would become completely
impossible, because you have to borrow values on the stack and the push
something onto it. Also it's lifetime galore, which I just didn't want to
handle. That brought up another problem though, because you can't have pointers
at compile time in your Datasegment.
I ended up with something like this:


```rust
enum Data<RefT> {
    CopyData,
    NonCopyData
    Ref(RefT)
}
```

and at compile time refs where usize and at runtime they were pointers.
However, that reintroduced that problem of needing a memory instance to
evaluate a data object. The main problem was having references to the data
segment in the data segment. Evaluating those at runtime would have been super
slow. Also I like being able to get my values out of a Data obj, without
needing another object (like the stack). So I finally realized that at compile
time, references should be disallowed, and so I switched the ref type to `()`. 

I still stuck to the idea of combining stack and heap though, which led to some
nasty byte code bugs, because the stack would suddenly be bigger or smaller
than expected because some commands pushed two value, and some only one, also
I needed a lot of code to cover error cases where a stack entry that contained
a string value (instead of a ref) was accessed, which was not supposed to be
accessed. So in the end, I introduced a heap. Now I have to deal with removing
the objects from the heap.

- how.

- the heap data structure

- more on Data and Value and their co-recursion

- built ins

- exec as compiler extension

- rusts proc macro potential

- how extensions are compiled into the language, and not via trait objects or
  something. Mucho speed
